Thumb arthritis is common with aging and occurs when cartilage wears away from the ends of the bones that form the joint at the base of your thumb — also known as the carpometacarpal (CMC) joint.

Thumb arthritis can cause severe pain, swelling, and decreased strength and range of motion, making it difficult to do simple tasks, such as turning doorknobs and opening jars. Treatment generally involves a combination of medication and splints. Severe thumb arthritis might require surgery.
Symptoms
Pain is the first and most common symptom of thumb arthritis. Pain can occur at the base of your thumb when you grip, grasp or pinch an object, or use your thumb to apply force.

Other signs and symptoms might include:

Swelling, stiffness and tenderness at the base of your thumb
Decreased strength when pinching or grasping objects
Decreased range of motion
Enlarged or bony appearance of the joint at the base of your thumb
When to see a doctor
See your doctor if you have persistent swelling, stiffness or pain at the base of your thumb.
Causes
Thumb arthritis commonly occurs with aging. Previous trauma or injury to the thumb joint also can cause thumb arthritis.

In a normal thumb joint, cartilage covers the ends of the bones — acting as a cushion and allowing the bones to glide smoothly against each other. With thumb arthritis, the cartilage that covers the ends of the bones deteriorates, and its smooth surface roughens. The bones then rub against each other, resulting in friction and joint damage.

The damage to the joint might result in growth of new bone along the sides of the existing bone (bone spurs), which can produce noticeable lumps on your thumb joint.

Risk factors
Factors that can increase your risk of thumb arthritis include:

Female sex.
Age above 40 years.
Obesity.
Certain hereditary conditions, such as joint ligament laxity and malformed joints.
Injuries to your thumb joint, such as fractures and sprains.
Diseases that change the normal structure and function of cartilage, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Although osteoarthritis is the most common cause of thumb arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis can also affect the CMC joint, usually to a lesser extent than other joints of the hand.
Activities and jobs that put high stress on the thumb joint.
Diagnosis
During a physical exam, your doctor will ask about your symptoms and look for noticeable swelling or lumps on your joints.

Your doctor might hold your joint while moving your thumb, with pressure, against your wrist bone. If this movement produces a grinding sound, or causes pain or a gritty feeling, the cartilage has likely worn down, and the bones are rubbing against each other.

Imaging techniques, usually X-rays, can reveal signs of thumb arthritis, including:

Bone spurs
Worn-down cartilage
Loss of joint space
Treatment
In the early stages of thumb arthritis, treatment usually involves a combination of non-surgical therapies. If your thumb arthritis is severe, surgery might be necessary.

Medication
To relieve pain, your doctor might recommend:

Topical medications, such as capsaicin or diclofenac, which are applied to the skin over the joint
Over-the-counter pain relievers, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve)
Prescription pain relievers, such as celecoxib (Celebrex) or tramadol (Conzip, Ultram)
Splint
A splint can support your joint and limit the movement of your thumb and wrist. You might wear a splint just at night or throughout the day and night.

Splints can help:

Decrease pain
Encourage proper positioning of your joint while you complete tasks
Rest your joint
Injections
If pain relievers and a splint aren't effective, your doctor might recommend injecting a long-acting corticosteroid into your thumb joint. Corticosteroid injections can offer temporary pain relief and reduce inflammation.

Surgery
If you don't respond to other treatments or if you're barely able to bend and twist your thumb, your doctor might recommend surgery. Options include:

Joint fusion (arthrodesis). The bones in the affected joint are permanently fused. The fused joint can bear weight without pain, but has no flexibility.
Osteotomy. The bones in the affected joint are repositioned to help correct deformities.
Trapeziectomy. One of the bones in your thumb joint (trapezium) is removed.
Joint replacement (arthroplasty). All or part of the affected joint is removed and replaced with a graft from one of your tendons.
These surgeries can all be done on an outpatient basis. After surgery, you can expect to wear a cast or splint over your thumb and wrist for up to six weeks. Once the cast is removed, you might have physical therapy to help you regain hand strength and movement.
Lifestyle and home remedies
To ease pain and improve joint mobility, try to:

Modify hand tools. Consider purchasing adaptive equipment — such as jar openers, key turners and large zipper pulls — designed for people with limited hand strength. Replace traditional door handles, which you must grasp with your thumb, with levers.
Apply cold. Icing the joint for five to 15 minutes several times a day can help relieve swelling and pain.
Apply heat. For some, heat may be more effective than cold in relieving pain.
Preparing for your appointment
You might be referred to a doctor who specializes in disorders of the joints (rheumatologist).

What you can do
Write down your symptoms, including any that may seem unrelated to the reason why you scheduled the appointment.
Write down your key medical information, including other conditions and any history of injury to the painful joint.
Write down key personal information, including any major changes or stressors in your life.
Make a list of all your medications, vitamins or supplements.
Ask a relative or friend to accompany you, to help you remember what the doctor says.
Write down questions to ask your doctor.
Questions to ask your doctor
What's the most likely cause of my symptoms?
What kinds of tests do I need?
Is my condition likely temporary or chronic?
What treatments are available?
Are there any restrictions I should follow?
I have other health conditions. How can I best manage them together?
In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your doctor, don't hesitate to ask other questions.

What to expect from your doctor
Your doctor is likely to ask you a number of questions. Being ready to answer them may leave time to go over points you want to discuss in depth. You might be asked:

When did your pain begin?
How severe are your symptoms? Are they continuous or occasional?
What, if anything, seems to improve or worsen your symptoms?
Have you ever injured that hand?
Symptoms
Signs and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea include:

Excessive daytime sleepiness
Loud snoring
Observed episodes of stopped breathing during sleep
Abrupt awakenings accompanied by gasping or choking
Awakening with a dry mouth or sore throat
Morning headache
Difficulty concentrating during the day
Mood changes, such as depression or irritability
High blood pressure
Decreased libido
When to see a doctor
Consult a medical professional if you have, or if your partner observes, the following:

Snoring loud enough to disturb your sleep or that of others
Waking up gasping or choking
Pausing in your breathing during sleep
Having excessive daytime drowsiness, which may cause you to fall asleep while working, watching television or even driving a vehicle
Snoring doesn't necessarily indicate something potentially serious, and not everyone who snores has obstructive sleep apnea.

Be sure to talk to your doctor if you snore loudly, especially if your snoring is interrupted by periods of silence. With obstructive sleep apnea, snoring usually is loudest when you sleep on your back, and it quiets when you turn on your side.

Ask your doctor about any sleep problem that leaves you chronically fatigued, sleepy and irritable. Excessive daytime drowsiness may be due to other disorders, such as narcolepsy.
When to see a doctor
Consult a medical professional if you have, or if your partner observes, the following:

Snoring loud enough to disturb your sleep or that of others
Waking up gasping or choking
Pausing in your breathing during sleep
Having excessive daytime drowsiness, which may cause you to fall asleep while working, watching television or even driving a vehicle
Snoring doesn't necessarily indicate something potentially serious, and not everyone who snores has obstructive sleep apnea.

Be sure to talk to your doctor if you snore loudly, especially if your snoring is interrupted by periods of silence. With obstructive sleep apnea, snoring usually is loudest when you sleep on your back, and it quiets when you turn on your side.

Ask your doctor about any sleep problem that leaves you chronically fatigued, sleepy and irritable. Excessive daytime drowsiness may be due to other disorders, such as narcolepsy.
Risk factors
Anyone can develop obstructive sleep apnea. However, certain factors put you at increased risk, including:

Excess weight. Most but not all people with obstructive sleep apnea are overweight. Fat deposits around the upper airway can obstruct breathing. Medical conditions that are associated with obesity, such as hypothyroidism and polycystic ovary syndrome, also can cause obstructive sleep apnea.
Older age. The risk of obstructive sleep apnea increases as you age but appears to level off after your 60s and 70s.
Narrowed airway. You might inherit naturally narrow airways. Or your tonsils or adenoids might become enlarged and block your airway.
High blood pressure (hypertension). Obstructive sleep apnea is relatively common in people with hypertension.
Chronic nasal congestion. Obstructive sleep apnea occurs twice as often in those who have consistent nasal congestion at night, regardless of the cause. This may be due to narrowed airways.
Smoking. People who smoke are more likely to have obstructive sleep apnea.
Diabetes. Obstructive sleep apnea might be more common in people with diabetes.
Sex. In general, men are twice or three times as likely as premenopausal women to have obstructive sleep apnea. The frequency of obstructive sleep apnea increases in women after menopause.
A family history of sleep apnea. Having family members with obstructive sleep apnea might increase your risk.
Asthma. Research has found an association between asthma and the risk of obstructive sleep apnea.
Complications
Obstructive sleep apnea is considered a serious medical condition. Complications can include:

Daytime fatigue and sleepiness. Because of a lack of restorative sleep at night, people with obstructive sleep apnea often have severe daytime drowsiness, fatigue and irritability. They might have difficulty concentrating and find themselves falling asleep at work, while watching TV or even when driving. This can put them at higher risk of work-related accidents.

Children and young people with obstructive sleep apnea might do poorly in school and commonly have attention or behavior problems.

Cardiovascular problems. Sudden drops in blood oxygen levels that occur during obstructive sleep apnea increase blood pressure and strain the cardiovascular system. Many people with obstructive sleep apnea develop high blood pressure (hypertension), which can increase the risk of heart disease.

The more severe the obstructive sleep apnea, the greater the risk of coronary artery disease, heart attacks, heart failure and strokes.

Obstructive sleep apnea increases the risk of abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), which can lower blood pressure. If there's underlying heart disease, these repeated multiple episodes of arrhythmias could lead to sudden death.

Complications with medications and surgery. Obstructive sleep apnea is also a concern with certain medications and general anesthesia. These medications, such as sedatives, narcotic analgesics and general anesthetics, relax your upper airway and can worsen your obstructive sleep apnea.

If you have obstructive sleep apnea, having major surgery, especially after being sedated and lying on your back, can worsen breathing problems. People with obstructive sleep apnea might be more prone to complications after surgery.

Before you have surgery, tell your doctor if you have obstructive sleep apnea or symptoms related to the condition. Your doctor might want you tested for obstructive sleep apnea before surgery.

Eye problems. Some research has found a connection between obstructive sleep apnea and certain eye conditions, such as glaucoma. Eye complications can usually be treated.
Sleep-deprived partners. Loud snoring can keep those around you from getting good rest and eventually disrupt your relationships. Some partners choose to sleep in another room.
People with obstructive sleep apnea may also complain of memory problems, morning headaches, mood swings or depression, and a need to urinate frequently at night.

Obstructive sleep apnea might be a risk factor for COVID-19. People with obstructive sleep apnea have been found to be at higher risk for developing a severe form of COVID-19 and needing hospital treatment than those who don't have obstructive sleep apnea.